so welcome back to the natural language
processing course the next section is
going to be on dependency parsing
everything that we talked about parsing
so far had to deal with Constituent
parsing and interestingly enough for
many years perhaps for decades that was
the prevalent kind of parsing in the
last few years maybe ten years or so it
has become more fashionable to use
instead of constituency parsing
something called dependency parsing it's
a simpler method and it achieves very
good accuracy for many different NOP
tasks so what is dependency parsing
before I can talk about dependency
parsing let me explain what is the
dependency structure of a sentence let's
consider a simple noun phrase such as
blue house this is a noun phrase and its
head is the noun house and bloom somehow
modifies house but the entire phrase is
a type of house it's not type of blue so
we have a dependency between house and
blue where house is the root of the tree
and blue is a modifier or some sort of
additional information that gets added
to house specified so the terminology
used in linguistics is the following the
word blue in this example is called
either a modifier or a dependent or a
child or a subordinate in the word house
which is the head can also be called the
governor the parent or the regent so you
can see all of those terms used in the
different kinds of literature let's look
at the more specific more complicated
sentence we have unionized workers are
usually better pay than their union
non-union counterparts we want to build
an entire structure for the sentence
based on the dependencies between
adjacent words so the word paid is
considered to be the most important word
in the sentence it's the main predicate
so the main verb its subject is workers
so there is a dependency between paid
and workers with pay they paid as the
head and workers as the dependent
workers itself is modified by the word
unionized which tells what kind of
workers we are talking about and so on
you can fill out the entire chart by
adding dependencies
cover all of the wards and as you can
see the word paid doesn't have any
parent because it's the root of the
sentence there's another notation that
people use for dependencies you can have
the verb on top vbn in this example paid
and then it's children labeled with the
different types of dependencies for
example prepositional phrase adverbial
modifier now subject and so on so you
can also notice that there is some
connection between the dependency
structure of the sentence and the phrase
structure of the sentence so I'm going
to alternate between those two slides
for a second this is the phrase
structure where the sentence turns into
a noun phrase and a verb phrase here's
the equivalent dependency structure
where the verb is at the top it turns
out that there are some methods which
can take a structure like this one here
and use the so called head holes to
convert it into a dependency structure
automatically so what is a dependency
grammar
it's a grammar that captures lexical and
syntactic dependencies between words and
the top-level predicate of the sentence
becomes the root of the parse tree and
they're much simpler to parse than
context-free grammars and they're very
useful for languages that have three
word order so I just check and Latin so
how do we identify the heads in a pair
of words well let's use this terminology
age for head and for modifier so in
general if you have to choose which one
is the head you can use the following
principles H determines the syntactic
category of the construct or H
determines the semantic category of the
construct H it can be required whereas M
can be skipped so in the example blue
house house cannot be skipped that's the
head M our blue can be skipped and they
may also be given a specific type of
dependency there may be a fixed linear
position of the modifier with respect to
the head so for example an adjective can
modify the noun right next to it so
here's an example of a list of rules
that
come from Michael Collins's PhD
dissertation you can see that in every
case you have a parent non-terminal and
a list of priority children so let's
look at an example for example for s we
may have the following children
constituents 2 and in which are
different kinds of prepositions a verb
phrase another sentence s bar adjectives
a phrase and so on and then the rules
according to colons are to pick the
first one on this list that appears so
for example if we can choose between a
verb phrase and a preposition we're
going to pick the preposition if there
are no prepositions if we have to choose
let's say between a verb phrase and a
sentence we would pick the verb phrase
because it appears on the left here and
so on now you should also notice that
some of those directions are going the
other way so for example for adjectives
of phrase we go left to right but for
adverb your phrase we go right to left
so if there's more than one candidate
with the same label among the children
we're going to pick the one that comes
to the right instead of the one and
comes to the left so here's some of the
main techniques for dependency parsing
the first type are based on dynamic
programming they use method similar to
CKY and they have cubic complexity there
was one famous paper by Jason Eisner in
calling 96 which shows why this is the
case so here's an example of a sentence
in dependency representation Mary likes
cats
so the predicate of the sentence is
likes and the two arguments or the two
modifiers of likes are Mary and cats so
we can build this kind of tree by using
dynamic programming starting with the
equivalent of a CKY parser and in each
case propagate the head to the top of
the production so for example this end
subject dependency here and direct
object dependency would be mapped to the
labels of the depend of the parse tree
another set of techniques for dependency
parsing are based on constraint
satisfaction
so this kind of technique was introduced
in the early 90s by Maruyama carlson and
others so here's an example we have some
set of constraints between words and
their labels and their dependencies in
this particular case the rule says that
a determiner modifies a noun
on the right and its label has to be n
mod because again in the previous line
you see that the position of the para
speech has to be before
so in general constraint based methods
are problematic because constraint
satisfaction R is an np-complete problem
and you need a significant number of
heuristics to make it work in practice
so in general the idea is to base took a
present a sentence in the form of a
constraint graph that includes a core
grammar with domains nodes and
constraints and to find an assignment
that doesn't contradict any of the
constraints and if more than one
assignment exists then you should add
some additional constraints to further
narrow down your choices for the parse a
third type of category of dependency
parsing techniques are based on
deterministic parsing so this was done
by many different people including
Covington but most recently by the mouth
parser created by you Hakeem never and
his colleagues so the mouth parser
method is very similar to a shift reduce
parser for context-free grammars and it
reduces the the reduce operator creates
dependencies with the head on either the
left or on the right so that essentially
creates dependency arcs to the left and
to the right there's also techniques
based on graphs
more specifically the techniques based
on maximum spanning trees that were
pioneered by McDonald and Pereira and
some others around 2005 so one issue
with dependency parsing is productivity
and non productivity so if you look at
the sentence here where did you come
from last year you will see that
according to one of the parses the one
that is shown above the sentence you
don't have any crossing links whereas
the parse on the bottom has come
connected to year and from connected to
where so if you allow your dependency
trees to include crossing
like this you have what is known as a
long projective dependency tree it turns
out that this is more of a polyfill
languages with free word order such as
ration and check and not so much for
English so that's why in English there's
quite a lot of literature and it
includes only projective parses in
addition to the non projective ones so
let's talk about some of the specific
examples about dependency parsing so for
example the Macdonald a tall paper from
2005 so the idea in the McDonald paper
is that the dependency parsing problem
is reduced to the equivalent problem of
searching for maximum spanning tree a
directed graph and there already exist
well-known methods by tulu and Edmunds
that work efficiently to find maximum
spanning trees on directed graphs so
here's an example we have the centre's
John so Mary we can represent this is a
graph where we have the three worth
jumps oh and Mary pass an additional
root word represented as nodes in the
graph and then we can have weights that
can be determined from training data and
then when you perform the maximum
spanning tree algorithm on this graph
you're going to get the parse which
looks like this root of pointing to saw
which is the main verb and then so in
turn pointing to its two dependents
John and Mary so one of the most popular
techniques for dependency parsing in the
last few years was is the so called
mouth parser that was introduced by you
acumen Evora it has undergone many
different changes over the years so the
version that I were to describe is just
one of many so it's a very similar
method to shift reduce parsing it
includes the same components as a shift
reduce parser specifically a stack and a
buffer but it also includes a set of
dependencies that correspond to the
dependency arcs so the reduce operation
combines an element from the stack with
one from the buffer and the RTT parser
which is one of the versions of the mod
parser includes shift reduce plus a left
arc and I write our cooperation so here
some examples of those four operations
in the shift example the word
gets removed from the sentence and added
to the stack introduce the word from the
top of the stack gets converted and in
the left and right are examples we have
the word that is first in the remaining
buffer combined with the words on the
top of the stack to combine a new
dependency so here's an example we have
the sentence people want to be free at
the beginning we start with a style that
just contains the symbol hood the buffer
contains people want to be free and the
list of Arc's is empty so the first
operation here is a shift operation
we'll take the word people and we move
it from the buffer to the stack leaving
the rest of the words want to be free in
the buffer the next operation is the
left arc operation where we remove the
word people from the top of the stack
and we combine it with the first word in
the buffer want to create a new arc
called n sub and labeled a1 the next
integration is to combine the word want
with the hood so that's a right arc
operation we are removing the word 1
from the stack and combining it with the
root note and so on so each of the
actions here is selected using a
classifier looking at features that are
local to the current word so there is no
search involved which makes the
algorithm very efficient and the final
list of arcs it is returned at the end
of the parse is the food dependency tree
of the sentence so let's look at
evaluation matrix with dependency
parsing we can have label dependency
accuracy which is similar to the labeled
constituent accuracy for traditional
parsing methods so it's just the number
of correct dependencies divided by the
number of dependencies that could be
there so here's an example here we have
an output of a dependency parser with
the following standard representation
the first column is the word number the
second word is the word in the sentence
the third is the head of the dependency
and then you have the part
speech of the word and then the number
of their head and the labor of the
dependency so in the first example we
have unionized modifies workers so
that's word number one modifying word
number two and the name of this
dependency is n mod so what are the
complexities of the different algorithms
for dependency parsing well the
projective CKY method is order n to the
fifth power a better version by Eisner
is a cubic non projective manner like
MST using the Chu Lu Edmonds method for
maximal spanning trees has a quadratic
complexity and finally the mod parser
has a linear complexity so it turns out
the dependency information is very
useful for information extraction tasks
it can define different rules that tell
you what sort of dependency sub trees
are connected with specific relation so
here's an example from a paper by aircon
at all 2007 where the goal was to
identify interactions between proteins
in the medical literature so you have
the dependency tree of the sentence so
on top starting with demonstrated then
it's two children being results and
interacts and so on so the full sentence
is the results demonstrated that ka IC
interacts rhythmically with ka ia
ka IB and SAS a so you can see that in
order to identify all the protein
interactions here for example between ka
IC and ki a or between ka IC and sa sa
you can look at the path that connects
them in the dependency parse so for
example ka IC is connected to ka IA
using the following paths it first there
is a dependency named and such then
there is a node called interacts then
there is a dependency called prepped
with and finally goes to sa sa and
finally it gets to another dependency
called Cange
conjunction and and finally to the node
of the target ki a so you can chain
system that has already labeled 14
dependencies to identify some new pairs
of 14 dependencies in new text and the
system would learn patterns of this kind
another application of dependency trees
indices in the so called dependency
kernel so dependency kernel as described
in one of the previous segments is a
technique that decides how similar two
sentences are based on how similar their
dependency structures are so here we
have an example from Vaness Qin moon in
2005 where they wanted to figure out
what relations appear in different
sentences so for example one of the
relations was protesters located at
stations and the shortest path between
those two words in the dependency graph
goes from protesters to cease to
stations so those sets of dependencies
can be used in identifying how similar
two sentences can be so I'm going to
conclude this segment with a few
pointers some external links to
resources related to dependency parsing
the first one here is the data set and
evaluation methodology for the Connaught
and shared tasks or multilingual
dependency parsing there is another
interesting pointer which is one of the
earliest dependency tree banks the so
called Prag dependency tree bank the
next is a wiki page about all kinds of
methods for dependency parsing and then
there is a pointer to the mouth parser
method from Navarre and some of the
earlier dependency parsers such as at
the Conlon's mini far and the link
parser from Carnegie Mellon's dance
later and David temporarily and just to
give you an illustration of one of them
this sentence here shows the first
sentence of the penn treebank
represented as a dependency structure
it's extracted from the viewer that
comes with the product dependency tea
bag so the sentence here is PR winkin 61
years old who joined the board as a
non-executive director November 29th as
you can see the hood is connected to
join which is the main predicate of the
sentence and
then all of the modifiers of join I
listed as its children for example will
board and November and then recursively
you can have all the other dependencies
shown in the tree so for example 29 here
modifies November a non-executive
modifies director and so on so this is a
little bit of introduction to dependency
parsing we're going to continue in the
next set of slides with a topic on
alternative syntactic representations